{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 6.3.9600}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: initial discussion paper\par
Introduction\par
The Wheatley Review, commissioned by the Chancellor of the Exchequer following the\par
emergence of attempted manipulation of LIBOR and EURIBOR, will report on the following:\par
\f1\bullet  necessary reforms to the current framework for setting and governing LIBOR;\par
\bullet  the adequacy and scope of sanctions to appropriately tackle LIBOR abuse; and\par
\bullet  whether analysis of the failings of LIBOR has implications on other globalbenchmarks.\par
This discussion paper sets out the direction of the Review\rquote s initial thinking on these issues,\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 inviting responses from involved and interested parties.\par
The need for reform of LIBOR\par
LIBOR is the most frequently utilised benchmark for interest rates globally, referenced in\par
transactions with a notional outstanding value of at least $300tn.\par
However, LIBOR has a number of significant weaknesses that have eroded its credibility as a\par
benchmark:\par
\bullet  LIBOR is intended to be a representation of unsecured inter-bank term borrowing\par
costs; as this segment of the market has significantly declined, submissions to LIBOR\par
have become increasingly reliant on expert judgement rather than transaction data.\par
\bullet  Banks and individuals working for banks have an incentive to attempt to\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 manipulate the\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 submissions that compile the rate, either to signal their perceived\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 institutional creditworthiness or to support trading positions.\par
\bullet  The mechanism by which LIBOR is administered leaves opportunity for contributors\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 to attempt to manipulate submissions in line with these incentives; submissions are\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 not always based on transactions and the process is self-policing.\par
\bullet  There are weaknesses in governance arrangements for the compilation process, and\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 within contributing banks themselves. Stronger oversight, with greater\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 independence and transparency is needed.\par
There are ongoing investigations by a number of global financial regulators and public\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 authorities into alleged attempted manipulation of LIBOR. It is already clear that at least some\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 serious misconduct has taken place relating to LIBOR submissions in recent years.\par
Options for reform\par
Retaining LIBOR unchanged in its current state is not a viable option, given the scale of identified\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 weaknesses and the loss of credibility that it has suffered. Therefore, LIBOR has to be\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 significantly strengthened to take account of these weaknesses, while, in parallel, alternative\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 benchmarks that can take on some or all of the roles that LIBOR currently performs in the\f0\lang1033  \f1\lang9 market should be identified and evaluated.\par
Strengthening LIBOR\par
This paper sets out detailed ideas on how LIBOR could be comprehensively reformed in order to\par
deal with the issues identified and restore confidence in the rate. Options for strengthening all\par
aspects of the LIBOR framework should be considered:\par
\bullet  The mechanism for calculating LIBOR could be significantly improved, with the\par
calculation and compilation methodologies made more robust and transparent in\par
the light of the issues identified. For instance, a trade reporting mechanism could\par
be established to improve the availability of transaction data.\par
\bullet  Governance of the LIBOR process could be amended to make it more independent,\par
robust and transparent, both within the contributing banks and within the\par
administrator of LIBOR. For example, a code of conduct could be introduced to\par
establish clear guidelines relating to policies and procedures concerning LIBOR\par
submissions.\par
\bullet  The regulatory framework could be reformed to bring administration of or\par
submission to LIBOR within the regulatory purview. Furthermore, if necessary,\par
sanctions could be strengthened.\par
Alternatives to LIBOR\par
Whatever improvements are made to LIBOR, it is likely that markets will want to consider\par
alternative benchmarks for at least some of the types of transaction that currently rely on LIBOR.\par
In some cases, there are existing rates that could be used more widely. For other types of\par
transactions, new benchmarks may need to be developed.\par
Any migration to new benchmarks would require a carefully planned and managed transition, in\par
order to limit disruption to the huge volume of outstanding contracts that reference LIBOR.\par
Given the global importance of LIBOR, a decision to migrate towards alternative benchmarks\par
should be coordinated at an international level by relevant bodies. The UK authorities should\par
take a leading role in these reforms.\par
Implications for other benchmarks\par
The issues that have been identified with LIBOR have broader implications for a range of other\par
benchmarks, both within financial markets and beyond.\par
Some benchmarks are already under scrutiny; IOSCO is investigating on oil spot prices, while the\par
European Commission is looking into other financial benchmarks, such as EURIBOR.\par
It is worth considering whether there is a clear set of principles or characteristics that should be\par
applied to all globally used benchmarks. These could include:\par
\bullet  a robust methodology for calculation;\par
\bullet  credible governance structures;\par
\bullet  an appropriate degree of formal oversight and regulation; and\par
\bullet  transparency and openness\par
1.1 The London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (hereafter referred to as LIBOR) refers to a series of daily\par
interest rate benchmarks administered by the British Bankers\rquote  Association (the BBA). These rates\par
are calculated across ten currencies and fifteen tenors (borrowing periods) ranging from\par
overnight to one year. They serve as a series of indices of the average cost to banks of unsecured\par
borrowing for a given currency and time period.\par
1.2 Since 2009, the Financial Services Authority (FSA), along with regulators and public\par
authorities in a number of different jurisdictions \endash  including the United States, Canada, Japan,\par
Switzerland and the European Union \endash  have been investigating a number of institutions for\par
alleged misconduct relating to LIBOR, EURIBOR and other benchmarks.\par
1.3 As part of its response to these investigations, the UK Government has established an\par
independent review into a number of aspects of the setting and usage of LIBOR. This review is\par
being led by Martin Wheatley, managing director of the FSA and CEO-designate of the new\par
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the body which will have responsibility for regulation of\par
wholesale markets in the UK\rquote s new regulatory framework.\par
1.4 Box 1.A sets out the Review\rquote s terms of reference. It should be emphasised that the Review\par
will not\par
1.5 This discussion paper sets out the Review\rquote s initial analysis of the issues that have come to\par
light in relation to LIBOR. The paper is structured as follows:\par
consider any specific allegations against particular financial institutions or individuals\par
regarding attempts to manipulate LIBOR or other benchmarks. These allegations will continue to\par
be investigated by the FSA and other regulators around the world.\par
\bullet  Chapter 2 identifies issues and failures within the current LIBOR processes that have\par
contributed to the current state of affairs.\par
\bullet  Chapter 3 explores the options to strengthen LIBOR, covering the calculation\par
mechanism, governance structures, and options for regulation and sanctions\par
relating to manipulation and attempted manipulation of the rate.\par
\bullet  Chapter 4 considers whether LIBOR could be replaced by an alternative benchmark\par
to reflect issues that have been identified, as well as changes in the applications for\par
which the benchmark is used in today\rquote s financial markets.\par
\bullet  Chapter 5 addresses the question of whether the thinking applied to LIBOR in this\par
paper is relevant to other benchmarks set in financial and other markets.\par
Box 1.A: Terms of reference of the Wheatley Review\par
The Wheatley Review will formulate policy recommendations with a view to:\par
1 Reforming the current framework for setting and governing LIBOR. This work\par
should, inter alia, consider:\par
\bullet  Whether participation in the setting of LIBOR should be brought into the\par
regulatory perimeter under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 as\par
a regulated activity;\par
\bullet  How LIBOR is constructed, including the feasibility of using of actual trade\par
data to set the benchmark;\par
\bullet  The appropriate governance structure for LIBOR;\par
\bullet  The potential for alternative rate-setting processes;\par
\bullet  The financial stability consequences of a move to a new regime and how a\par
transition could be appropriately managed.\par
2 Determining the adequacy and scope of sanctions to appropriately tackle LIBOR\par
abuse. This work should consider:\par
\bullet  The scope of the UK authorities\rquote  civil and criminal sanctioning powers with\par
respect to financial misconduct, particularly market abuse and abuse\par
relating to the setting of LIBOR and equivalent rate-setting processes; and\par
\bullet  The FSA\rquote s approved persons regime and investigations into market\par
misconduct.\par
3 Whether similar considerations apply with respect to other price-setting\par
mechanisms in financial markets, and provide provisional policy recommendations\par
in this area.\par
Other responses to the issue\par
1.6 As noted, there are already a number of regulatory investigations into allegations of\par
attempted manipulation of LIBOR and other similar benchmarks currently underway.\par
1.7 Additionally, Parliament has established a Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards.\par
This commission will investigate wider questions relating to professional standards and culture\par
within the UK banking sector, as well as lessons to be learned about corporate governance,\par
transparency and conflicts of interest, and their implications for regulation and Government\par
policy. The Parliamentary Commission will make legislative recommendations by 18 December,\par
in time for inclusion in the forthcoming banking reform Bill, which will implement the\par
Government\rquote s response to Sir John Vickers\rquote  Independent Commission on Banking.\par
1.8 A number of other national and international authorities \endash  such as the European\par
Commission \endash  are also conducting policy reviews of the framework surrounding the setting of\par
benchmarks for interest rates.\par
Next steps for the Review\par
1.9 The Wheatley Review has been tasked with reporting by the end of the summer. This\par
timetable will enable any immediate recommendations regarding the regulation of LIBOR and\par
other benchmarks to be considered by the Government in time for any proposals taken forward \par
to be included in the Financial Services Bill (which is currently being considered by the House of\par
Lords).\par
1.10 With this timetable in mind, the Review will aim to present its findings to the Chancellor of\par
the Exchequer by the end of September. Given the time available, consultation on this discussion\par
paper will be necessarily brief. Responses are requested within four weeks, by 7 September 2012.\par
1.11 Recognising the challenging timetable, Martin Wheatley and the Review team will be\par
seeking to engage actively with stakeholders in person, through meetings and seminars, as well\par
as through written responses. If you wish to arrange such a meeting please contact the Review\par
team using the details provided below. The Review is particularly interested in participating in\par
events involving a wide range of market participants or other stakeholders. Expressions of\par
interest from trade associations, user groups and other representative bodies will therefore be\par
particularly welcome.\par
How to respond to this discussion paper\par
1.12 The Review team invites responses to a number of specific questions, which can be found\par
at the end of each chapter, and are listed in full in Annex C. Respondents are also invited to\par
provide additional contributions on any issues they consider to be relevant.\par
1.13 Responses are requested by 7 September 2012. Please ensure that responses are sent in\par
before this date, as the Review team cannot guarantee that responses received after this date\par
will be considered. When responding, please state whether you are doing so as an individual or\par
on behalf of an organisation.\par
1.14 Given the short timescale of this response period, the Review team will accept interim\par
submissions in response to the paper.\par
1.15 Responses can be sent by email to: wheatleyreview@hmtreasury.gsi.gov.uk. Alternatively\par
they can be posted to:\par
The Wheatley Review\par
HM Treasury\par
1 Horse Guards Road\par
London\par
SW1A 2HQ\par
1.16 Submissions to the Review will be published online. If you would like some or all of the\par
information that you provide to be treated as confidential \endash  and not to be published \endash  please\par
mark this clearly in a covering note or e-mail (confidentiality language included in the body of\par
any submitted documents, or in standard form language in e-mails, is not sufficient), identifying\par
the relevant information and explaining why it is confidential. However, please note that even\par
where such requests are made, the Review cannot guarantee that confidentiality will be\par
maintained in all circumstances, in particular if disclosure should be required by law. \par
Introduction and summary\par
2.1 LIBOR is the most frequently utilised benchmark for interest rates globally, referenced in\par
transactions with a notional outstanding value of at least $300tn.\par
2.2 However, LIBOR has a number of significant weaknesses that have eroded its credibility as a\par
benchmark:\par
\bullet  LIBOR is intended to be a representation of unsecured inter-bank term borrowing\par
costs; as this segment of the market has significantly declined, submissions to LIBOR\par
have become increasingly reliant on expert judgement rather than transaction data.\par
\bullet  Banks and individuals working for banks have an incentive to attempt to\par
manipulate the submissions that compile the rate, either to signal their perceived\par
institutional creditworthiness or to support trading positions.\par
\bullet  The mechanism by which LIBOR is administered leaves opportunity for contributors\par
to attempt to manipulate submissions in line with these incentives; submissions are\par
not always based on transactions and the process is self-policing.\par
\bullet  There are weaknesses in governance arrangements for the compilation process,\par
and within contributing banks themselves. Stronger oversight, with greater\par
independence and transparency is needed.\par
2.3 There are ongoing investigations by a number of global financial regulators and public\par
authorities into alleged attempted manipulation of LIBOR. It is already clear that at least some\par
serious misconduct has taken place relating to LIBOR submissions in recent years.\par
2.4 Retaining LIBOR unchanged in its current state is not a viable option, given the scale of\par
identified weaknesses and the loss of credibility that it has suffered. Therefore, LIBOR has to be\par
significantly strengthened to take account of these weaknesses, while, in parallel, alternative\par
benchmarks that can take on some or all of the roles that LIBOR currently performs in the\par
market should be identified and evaluated.\par
The development and use of LIBOR\par
2.5 LIBOR is an indication of the costs of unsecured borrowing in the London interbank markets.\par
In essence it is a benchmark that gauges the interest rate, credit premium and liquidity premium\par
that a leading bank would expect to be offered by another similar institution.\par
2.6 It was established in the 1980s in order to provide a fair and standardised interest rate\par
benchmark for loans, thereby facilitating the growth of the syndicated loans market.\par
Standardised inter-bank rates were attractive as a benchmark for investors and borrowers as\par
they allowed the lending banks to pass on changes in the funding costs of an average bank over\par
the course of the duration of the loan. The development of LIBOR was also driven, from an early\par
stage, by the growth in new financial instruments such as forward rate agreements, which also\par
required a standardised interest rate benchmark.\par
Box 2.A: Definition of LIBOR\par
LIBOR is calculated by Thomson Reuters on behalf of the BBA. Contributing banks submit a\par
response to the following question for each currency and tenor:\par
\ldblquote At what rate could you borrow funds, were you to do so by asking for and then accepting\par
inter-bank offers in a reasonable market size just prior to 11 am?\rdblquote\par
The highest and lowest submissions are discarded, with the remaining submissions averaged\par
to create LIBOR for the given day. For some currencies, more outliers are discarded as there\par
are a higher number of contributing banks.\par
2.7 Today, inter-bank benchmarks such as LIBOR and EURIBOR are used across the world for a\par
range of financial products by a wide variety of financial market participants, for both hedging\par
and speculative purposes. Table 2.A sets out some of the more common uses for LIBOR, along\par
with an estimate of the notional value of financial products using LIBOR, which in total adds up\par
to at least $300tn. No comprehensive source of data on the use of LIBOR exists so this data is\par
drawn from a number of different published sources and relies on a number of assumptions,\par
none of which will be complete or exact. Table 2.A should therefore be treated as indicative\par
rather than comprehensive. A number of other estimates of the value of contracts linked to\par
LIBOR exist in the public domain, ranging from $300tn up to $800tn.\par
2.8 Although LIBOR is currently published for ten currencies and fifteen maturities, this was not\par
always the case. LIBOR was originally published for just three currencies \endash  Sterling, US Dollar and\par
Japanese Yen \endash  before growing to cover a total of 16 currencies prior to the introduction of the\par
euro in 2000. Similarly, the number of maturities has increased over time from 12 to 15 \endash  in\par
1998 the 1-week rate was added, and in 2001 the overnight and 2-week rates were added.\par
2.9 Although LIBOR is calculated in London, it is based on daily submissions from a number of\par
international banks and is used as a benchmark globally. The increasing global integration of\par
financial markets has meant that contracts have converged to a single internationally recognised\par
benchmark, and LIBOR in particular has benefited from a combination of the rise of the euro\par
markets and the convenient time-zone in which London sits. Additionally, as the prevalence of\par
LIBOR-linked contracts increased, there were network effects that made it more attractive for\par
other products to link to LIBOR: for example, adjustable rate mortgages in local markets moved\par
from being linked to niche measures of cost of funds to the more widely recognised and more\par
easily hedged LIBOR.\par
2.10 Several alternative benchmarks, such as the New York Funding Rate, have been established.\par
However, with the exception of EURIBOR, few have been able to build up market share\par
comparable to that of LIBOR.\par
Developments in the inter-bank borrowing market\par
2.11 Inter-bank benchmarks, such as LIBOR and EURIBOR, are an indication derived from\par
information and activity in the market for inter-bank borrowing costs. Therefore the functioning\par
of these underlying markets will have a direct impact on the benchmarks, and consequently on\par
all contracts referenced to them. Unsecured inter-bank markets for term borrowing have come\par
under severe stress and banks have been relying on other sources of funding for a greater\par
proportion of their funds, including secured borrowing, retail deposits and liquidity provided by\par
central banks.\par
2.12 This has been driven by several factors:\par
\bullet  There has been a significant increase in perceived risk of counterparty default (i.e.\par
credit risk), particularly in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. The\par
spread between inter-bank term interest rates and projected overnight cash rates\par
(derived from Overnight Index Swaps, hereafter \ldblquote OIS\rdblquote ) increased sharply around\par
this time, although has since fallen (Chart 2.A). Further, regulatory capital charges\par
arising from this increase in counterparty risk have reduced the demand for\par
unsecured funding.\par
\bullet  The introduction of liquidity coverage ratios \endash  in the UK and in Basel III \endash  have\par
modified the demand and supply of inter-bank funding, as banks transition to more\par
longer maturity funding and more secured funding sources.\par
\bullet  There was, and continues to be, a significant increase in liquidity available to banks\par
as a consequence of the exceptional measures taken by major central banks during\par
and after the crisis.\par
2.13 The long-term impact of these factors will vary. The increase in perceived counterparty\par
credit risk may be cyclical, although its effect on the inter-bank market may last for longer. The\par
effect of central bank operations has reduced the reliance of banks on private credit facilities.\par
However, the changing regulatory requirements concerning capital and liquidity \endash  both in the\par
UK, and anticipated at an international level \endash  reflect a permanent structural change, and so might have a permanent effect on the volume of lending in the inter-bank market, and\par
particularly on inter-bank unsecured lending at longer maturities.\par
2.14 Under the current definition of LIBOR a lower volume of trades is not necessarily a problem\par
since there is no mechanical link from transactions to the LIBOR calculation (see Annex A).\par
However it might make the expert judgement required to determine the appropriate rate\par
submission more difficult. The problem of limited transactions is not uniform. While there is still\par
some inter-bank lending, for many currencies and maturities trading remains very thin (see Chart\par
2.B).\par
2.15 Overall, the limited number of transactions means that there are some problems inherent\par
in a widely used benchmark that is nominally derived from unsecured inter-bank term lending.\par
First, determining an appropriate rate for all required points is difficult. Second, a relatively small\par
and illiquid market is used as the basis for determining rates in global loan and derivative\par
contracts that have a nominal outstanding value that is several multiples of the value of the\par
underlying inter-bank transactions.\par
2.16 However the large majority of financial contracts use only a small sub-set of these maturities.\par
In particular, three and six months are used most often, while use of the other tenors in contracts\par
is very limited. And dollar, yen and sterling rates continue to be by far the most widely used, as\par
Chart 2.C demonstrates in the cases of interest rate swaps and floating rate notes\par
2.17 Furthermore, it could be argued that In the current environment inter-bank lending rates\par
are dominated by credit risk and there is a large dispersion in the perceived creditworthiness of\par
banks. This, together with the low volume of interbank unsecured lending transactions, arguably\par
means that the concept of an average inter-bank rate derived from a panel of diverse banks has\par
less meaning as a measure of bank funding costs.\par
Failures of the current LIBOR regime\par
2.18 As discussed, LIBOR and similar benchmarks have in recent years come under increasing\par
scrutiny from regulators around the world. In the UK, the issue achieved widespread public\par
awareness with the publication of the FSA\rquote s findings against Barclays (see Box 2.B). This is only\par
the first of a number of investigations the FSA is carrying out into contributing banks.\par
Box 2.B: The FSA\rquote s Final Notice to Barclays1\par
On 27 June 2012, the FSA fined Barclays Bank plc \f0\'a359.5 million for significant failings\par
relating to LIBOR and EURIBOR. Barclays\rquote  breaches occurred over a number of years. Barclays\par
were found to have breached several of the FSA\rquote s Principles for Businesses in relation to its\par
submissions to the LIBOR and EURIBOR setting process. It breached the following Principles:\par
A firm must observe proper standards of market conduct (Principle 5)\par
Barclays acted inappropriately and breached Principle 5 on numerous occasions by\par
making LIBOR and EURIBOR submissions which took into account requests made by its\par
interest rate derivative traders. These traders were motivated by profit and sought to\par
benefit Barclay\rquote s trading positions.\par
Further, on numerous occasions Barclays sought to influence the EURIBOR submissions of\par
other banks.\par
Barclays acted inappropriately and breached Principle 5 on numerous occasions by\par
making LIBOR submissions that took into account concerns over the negative media\par
perception of Barclays\rquote  LIBOR submissions, which were seen by some commentators as a\par
measure of their inability to raise funds. Senior management\rquote s concerns resulted in\par
instructions being given by less senior managers to reduce LIBOR submissions to avoid\par
negative media comment.\par
A firm must take reasonable care to organise and control its affairs responsibly and\par
effectively, with adequate risk management systems (Principle 3)\par
Barclays breached Principle 3 by failing to have adequate risk management systems or\par
effective controls in place relating to its LIBOR and EURIBOR submissions processes. There\par
were no specific systems and controls in place until December 2009. The extent of\par
Barclays\rquote  misconduct was exacerbated by these inadequate systems and controls.\par
A firm must conduct its business with due skill, care and diligence (Principle 2)\par
Compliance failures meant that inappropriate submissions and inadequate controls\par
persisted. Barclays failed to conduct its business with due skill, care and diligence when\par
considering issues raised internally in relation to its LIBOR submissions, thereby breaching\par
Principle 2. LIBOR issues were escalated to its internal Compliance function on three\par
occasions, and in each case Compliance failed to assess and address them effectively.\par
As a consequence of these breaches, the FSA fined Barclays \'a359.5m, which included a\par
30% discount under the FSA\rquote s executive settlement procedures for agreeing to settle at an\par
early stage. Were it not for this discount, Barclays would have been fined \'a385m. Barclays\par
was separately fined $360m by the US authorities for attempted manipulation of and false\par
reporting concerning LIBOR and EURIBOR benchmark interest rates over a four year period\par
commencing as early as 2005.\par
There are a series of ongoing investigations by regulatory authorities concerning conduct\par
with respect to LIBOR, and the Barclays settlement is merely the first to conclude.\par
2.19 LIBOR is a representation of unsecured inter-bank borrowing costs, and given not all\par
contributing banks need to borrow at all maturities and in all currencies every day, it involves an\par
element of judgement and inference on the part of the contributor.\par
2.20 The need for judgement on the part of a contributor involves a discretion which can be\par
misused. Some contributing banks have sought to exploit the conflicts of interest that arose\par
from their respective roles as contributor to the rate, user of the rate, and wider participant in\par
the market. There is a risk that submissions may have reflected inappropriate factors, such as the\par
bank\rquote s trading position, or concerns as to adverse media comment, as illustrated above.\par
2.21 There are two types of problem that might arise from these conflicts of interest:\par
\f1\bullet  First, the credit-signalling (or stigma) effect: although a bank\rquote s daily LIBOR\par
submission does not necessarily reflect increased counterparty risk, it may be\par
interpreted by external observers as an indication of the creditworthiness of that\par
particular bank. During periods of market stress there is therefore an incentive to\par
lower submissions in order that perception of that bank\rquote s relative creditworthiness\par
is not negatively affected.\par
\bullet  Second, there are private economic incentives: contributing banks are both users of\par
and contributors to LIBOR and will therefore have assets and liabilities with substantial\par
sensitivities to changes in LIBOR. This then gives traders within banks a clear incentive to\par
seek to affect the overall LIBOR rate for the benefit of a particular trading exposure.\par
Further, the possibility of collusion between contributing banks exists.\par
2.22 Whatever the ultimate outcome of the ongoing investigations into alleged attempted\par
manipulation of LIBOR by a number of global banks, it has become increasingly clear that there\par
are a number of potential failings that need to be considered in detail:\par
\bullet  weaknesses in the LIBOR mechanism;\par
\bullet  limitations in the existing governance and regulation framework; and\par
\bullet  a question around whether existing regulatory powers and sanctions are\par
appropriate\par
Weaknesses in the LIBOR mechanism\par
2.23 The detailed procedures by which LIBOR is calculated are described in Annex A. In summary\par
terms, contributing banks for each currency submit interest rates for a range of maturities,\par
responding to a hypothetical question. From these submissions, an average is calculated once\par
data points at the top and bottom of the range have been excluded.\par
2.24 While this seems a relatively straightforward mechanism, specific problems include the\par
following factors:\par
\bullet  The rates that banks submit require expert judgement and inference on the part of\par
the contributor. This allows flexibility when determining rates but can give rise to a\par
risk of manipulation due to conflicts of interest.\par
\bullet  There is currently no standard, regularly employed, procedure to corroborate\par
individual submissions, which can allow contributors to act on the conflicts of\par
interest set out above.\par
\bullet  It is difficult to corroborate individual submissions as the market that LIBOR is\par
intended to provide an assessment of is illiquid and the types of transactions are\par
becoming increasingly less relevant for bank funding. This is particularly the case for\par
less well-used currencies and maturities.\par
\bullet  Knowledge of intended or recent submissions from individual banks can facilitate\par
manipulation and individual submissions to LIBOR are made public on a daily basis.\par
\bullet  The rate definition is for a cost of funds for the contributors own bank. Although it\par
provides transparency and accountability, such information is market sensitive as it\par
can be interpreted as an indicator of a particular bank\lquote s creditworthiness.\par
\bullet  The existing LIBOR panels are relatively small. Although they vary in size, even the\par
largest panels have only 18 banks at most. Furthermore, participation is voluntary,\par
so a large group of users benefit from the contribution of a small group of banks.\par
2.25 The day-to-day running of LIBOR is the responsibility of BBA LIBOR Ltd, a subsidiary of the\par
BBA and run by the LIBOR Manager. A separate company, Thomson Reuters, is responsible for\par
collecting the submissions from contributing banks and submitting them to checks and\par
verification, before publishing the final calculation to the market.\par
2.26 Clearly, contributing banks should themselves be primarily responsible for the quality of the\par
submissions they make to the LIBOR process. In order to fulfil this responsibility, the management\par
of these banks should ensure that they have robust processes in place, with appropriate systems\par
and controls in place to ensure high quality of submissions. Furthermore, responsibility should be\par
subject to the internal governance provided by the boards of these banks.\par
2.27 However, there is also a need for a degree of centralised oversight to ensure the integrity of\par
the benchmark. Oversight of LIBOR is the responsibility of the Foreign Exchange and Money\par
Markets Committee (FX&MM). Its remit includes the design of the benchmark and the governance\par
and scrutiny of all data and panel bank contributions. One of the important functions played by\par
FX&MM is to set, and periodically review, the parameters against which submissions are verified by\par
Thomson Reuters. The Fixings and Oversight subcommittees of FX&MM are respectively\par
responsible for investigating issues with submissions, and taking necessary action against\par
contributors. Annex A sets out the current governance framework in detail.\par
2.28 However, these arrangements have a number of potentially significant limitations. First,\par
there appears to be insufficient independence built into these governance structures. There is\par
currently a substantial overlap between the roles of contributing banks in providing the inputs\par
that are used to compile LIBOR, and in overseeing the LIBOR setting process (including technical\par
and procedural standards). Combined with the fact that contributing banks are also users of the\par
benchmark, this overlap suggests that there might be insufficient incentive for those responsible\par
for enforcing standards to do so with complete objectivity and independence. At the very least,\par
the lack of independence does little to enhance the credibility of the governance framework.\par
2.29 Second, oversight is insufficiently robust \endash  specifically:\par
\bullet  internal compliance and systems and controls within contributing banks, or within\par
BBA LIBOR Ltd, are not systematically overseen in order to provide assurance before\par
any potential misconduct arises; and\par
\bullet  it is not clear that the oversight function carried out by the Oversight subcommittee\par
has either the capacity \endash  in terms of resource and expertise \endash  or the appropriate\par
sanctions to detect, investigate and enforce against misconduct effectively.\par
2.30 Third, there is an apparent lack of transparency \endash  the oversight and scrutiny provided by\par
FX&MM and its two subcommittees does not appear to be sufficiently open and transparent to\par
provide the necessary degree of accountability to firms and markets with a direct interest in\par
being assured of the integrity of LIBOR. For example:\f0\lang1033\par
\f1\bullet  the membership of FX&MM and its subcommittees is not publicly known; and\par
\bullet  information regarding referrals of potentially problematic submissions to the LIBOR\par
manager or the Fixings Subcommittee, or relating to any enforcement action taken\par
by the Oversight Committee, is not published.\par
Regulation of LIBOR-related activities\par
2.31 As detailed in Annex B, the current regulatory and legal framework is not designed to allow\par
the FSA to regulate activities related to LIBOR. First, and most fundamentally, the activities of\par
contributing to or administering LIBOR (or any similar benchmark) are not currently \ldblquote regulated\par
activities\rdblquote  as defined under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA).\par
2.32 While the FSA is currently taking regulatory action in relation to attempted manipulation of\par
LIBOR by firms, this has been on the basis of the connection between LIBOR submitting and\par
other regulated activities, and there is no directly applicable specific regulatory regime covering\par
LIBOR-related activities. Further, as LIBOR setting is not a regulated activity, individual employees\par
of banks involved in the process do not have to be \ldblquote approved persons\rdblquote  under FSMA, restricting\par
the FSA\rquote s ability to take disciplinary action against individuals.\par
2.33 As noted above, a related issue is that participation on a LIBOR panel is currently voluntary.\par
LIBOR provides a significant benefit to a wide variety of market participants including banks,\par
investment banks, credit card and loan providers and investors. However, only a small subset of\par
these \endash  specifically a few large banks \endash  contribute to the setting of LIBOR, while the remainder\par
are able to benefit from its availability to the wider market. Given that contributing to LIBOR,\par
particularly in the current environment, is largely an unrewarding activity and comes with\par
potential risks. It could be argued that one of the gaps in the current regulatory regime is the\par
lack of a lever to compel participation in LIBOR panels.\par
Sanctions \endash  the market abuse regime\par
2.34 Even in the absence of a purpose-built regulatory regime for LIBOR-related activities, the\par
civil market abuse regime governed by Section 118 of FSMA could provide the FSA with an\par
alternative means of taking action in relation to misconduct in this area. However, for the\par
reasons discussed in Annex B, much manipulation and attempted manipulation of LIBOR is\par
unlikely to fall under the market abuse regime.\par
2.35 European legislation is currently under development that may have implications in this area\par
\endash  in particular, the Market Abuse Regulation (MAR) and the Criminal Sanctions Directive for\par
insider dealing and market manipulation (CSMAD) (see Box 2.C). This European legislation may\par
result in a strengthened UK regime through which it would be possible to address LIBOR-related\par
issues. However, it will be over two years until these could come into force.\par
Box 2.C: European legislation regarding market abuse\par
On 25 July the European Commission published its amendments to the proposed MAR and\par
CSMAD. These pieces of draft legislation constitute proposals for a new EU market abuse\par
regime, a piece of EU conduct regulation which creates prohibitions against (and sanctions\par
to apply to) insider dealing and market manipulation. The proposed amendments will\par
prohibit and criminalise the manipulation of benchmarks, including LIBOR and EURIBOR.\par
Specifically, the European Commission has published amendments to the proposed Market\par
Abuse Regulation to bring benchmarks into the scope of the Regulation, using a definition\par
of benchmarks based on that proposed in the Regulation for Markets in Financial\par
Instruments (MiFIR). It has also proposed amendments to the definition of the offence of\par
market manipulation, to capture both attempted and actual manipulation of benchmarks\par
themselves. The justification for these amendments has been presented in the recitals.\par
Similarly, the European Commission has proposed amendments to the draft CSMAD, to\par
include the MiFIR definition of benchmarks, amendments to the criminal offence of market\par
manipulation to include the manipulation of benchmarks themselves, and amendments to\par
the criminal offence of \ldblquote inciting, aiding and abetting and attempt\rdblquote  to include these\par
behaviours in relation to benchmarks.\par
The Commission proposes to require each member state to provide for criminal sanctions in\par
its national laws to cover the manipulation of benchmarks, as defined by the proposed\par
changes outlined above. The Commission is not proposing to set the minimum types and\par
levels of criminal sanctions; however it has proposed to undertake a review of the\par
appropriateness of such minima within four years of the Directive\rquote s entry into force.\par
At present, the UK Government has not committed to opt into CSMAD, and will review this\par
decision upon the completion of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) and\par
the MAR. At present, the UK already has a domestic civil regime for market abuse under\par
FSMA and a criminal regime in the Criminal Justice Act 1993.\par
As part of the European Commission\rquote s announcements on its proposed changes to the\par
market abuse regime, Commissioner Barnier has said that even more specific formula and\par
approaches will be required for all benchmarks, and that all those involved in the markets\par
should be subject at least to public supervision and public regulation, including in relation to\par
benchmarks. The European Commission and the European Central Bank, along with the\par
International Organisation of Securities Commissions and the Financial Stability Board are\par
currently examining how benchmarks are established in order to identify weaknesses and\par
shortcomings and suggest possible ways of addressing the problems at hand. This work is\par
not limited to interest rate benchmarks. Commissioner Barnier also announced that the\par
European Commission and its partners intend to submit a proposal to create a direct and\par
integrated supervisory mechanism by the beginning of September. \par
Sanctions \endash  criminal offences\par
2.36 A further issue \endash  as set out in the Review\rquote s terms of reference \endash  is whether the criminal\par
sanctions in respect of potential LIBOR manipulation and attempted manipulation are sufficient\par
to provide effective enforcement and deterrence. The current situation with respect to criminal\par
sanctions is detailed in Annex B.\par
2.37 In summary, LIBOR manipulation and attempted manipulation is unlikely to constitute a\par
criminal offence which falls under the prosecutorial responsibility of the FSA. Even the most \par
likely offence in FSMA, concerning misleading statements and practices established by Section\par
397 of FSMA, is unlikely to apply.\par
2.38 However, LIBOR manipulation and attempted manipulation may well constitute a criminal\par
offence under the law relating to fraud \endash  for example, fraud by false representation under Section\par
2 of the Fraud Act 2006 \endash  but this regime is not enforced and prosecuted by the FSA. The Serious\par
Fraud Office (SFO) has announced that it intends to proceed with investigations into LIBOR, but\par
the application of law relating to possible LIBOR-related offences is, for now, untested.\par
Approaches to reform\par
2.39 It is clear that, in light of the allegations of manipulation of the LIBOR benchmark by a\par
number of major banks, the existing LIBOR framework has lost credibility. The actual and\par
potential weaknesses identified above suggest that some strengthening of the LIBOR framework\par
will be needed if this credibility is to be restored.\par
2.40 The very public way in which these failings of the current LIBOR framework have been\par
exposed, and the significant scrutiny that the framework has come under, will clearly act as a\par
strong driver for reform. Given the weaknesses in the current system, it seems likely that changes\par
to all three aspects of the framework \endash  the calculation methodology, independent governance,\par
and regulatory oversight and sanctions \endash  need to be considered carefully. This discussion paper\par
therefore proceeds with a working assumption that retaining the status quo with no change at\par
all will not be a viable approach.\par
Reform options\par
2.41 The Review will therefore consider and consult on two approaches to making changes to\par
the status quo:\par
\bullet  strengthening LIBOR: the issues identified could be tackled through significant reform\par
of the existing system \endash  preserving the rate would limit the costs of transferring\par
existing contracts, while reforms could deal with failings in the system; or\par
\bullet  finding an alternative to LIBOR: If the issues and failings of LIBOR are considered\par
beyond resolution, new benchmarks could be recommended to replace some or all\par
of LIBOR\rquote s role in financial markets.\par
2.42 It should be noted that these two options are not mutually exclusive. Changes could be\par
made to the current framework in order to strengthen it, alongside developments of alternative\par
benchmarks in the longer-term. Given the large volume of contracts that reference LIBOR, either\par
approach will need to be conscious of transition risks and the potential role of international\par
authorities in coordinating reform or migration to an alternative benchmark (see box 2.D).\par
Further discussion of these issues can be found in Chapter 5.\par
Box 2.D: A global benchmark?\par
As noted, the existence of a common benchmark for interest rates has significant benefits,\par
reducing transaction costs for participants in markets, and driving substantial network effects\par
in that the more a particular benchmark is used in financial products, the more liquid these\par
financial products are and the easier it is to manage exposures and hedge risk.\par
Given the globalisation of financial markets, these benefits clearly also apply across national\par
boundaries. Indeed, the history of the development of LIBOR suggests that even when a\par
reference rate does not begin as a global benchmark, these characteristics will tend to drive\par
global convergence to a common benchmark.\par
Ultimately, the market will play an important role in determining which benchmarks to use,\par
and the extent to which there is convergence to a common global rate. However, the\par
consideration of whether a benchmark is likely to be used globally may have some\par
implications for the regulatory approach to benchmarks. For example, if a common\par
benchmark is going to be used across jurisdictions \endash  in the EU, the US and beyond \endash  then\par
authorities will certainly need to be aligned. These issues are discussed in more detail in\par
Chapter 5. \par
Introduction\par
3.1 This chapter sets out detailed ideas on how LIBOR could be comprehensively reformed in\par
order to deal with the issues identified and restore confidence in the rate. Options for\par
strengthening all aspects of the LIBOR framework should be considered:\par
\bullet  The mechanism for calculating LIBOR could be significantly improved, with the\par
calculation and compilation methodologies made more robust and transparent in\par
the light of the issues identified. For instance, a trade reporting mechanism could\par
be established to improve the availability of transaction data.\par
\bullet  Governance of the LIBOR process could be amended to make it more independent,\par
robust and transparent, both within the contributing banks and within the\par
administrator of LIBOR. For example, a code of conduct could be introduced to\par
establish clear guidelines relating to policies and procedures concerning LIBOR\par
submissions.\par
\bullet  The regulatory framework could be reformed to bring administration of or\par
submission to LIBOR within the regulatory purview. Furthermore, if necessary,\par
sanctions could be strengthened.\par
Strengthening the LIBOR mechanism\par
3.2 As summarised in Chapter 2, the key problems relating to the current LIBOR mechanism\par
were as follows:\par
\bullet  submissions necessarily involve judgement and inference on the part of the\par
contributor;\par
\bullet  there is no standard, regularly employed procedure to corroborate individual\par
submissions;\par
\bullet  corroboration is difficult since the underlying market is increasingly illiquid and the\par
types of transactions are less relevant for bank funding;\par
\bullet  daily publication of individual submissions can facilitate the effectiveness of\par
attempted manipulation;\par
\bullet  LIBOR submissions may be perceived as an implicit signal about bank\par
creditworthiness; and\par
\bullet  LIBOR panels contain relatively few contributors, allowing other banks to benefit\par
from their contributions.\par
Options for addressing these weaknesses are set out below. It should be noted that significant\par
change to the mechanism, governance and regulation of LIBOR will potentially cause some\par
transition risks for those existing transactions that reference LIBOR.\par
Options to support contributors in submitting rates\par
3.3 The fact that submissions involve expert judgement and inference on the part of the\par
contributor is not necessarily a weakness. However, it does create an opportunity for\par
manipulation where incentives exist to exploit this.\par
3.4 One response to the criticism that the current system relies on judgement and inference\par
would be to determine the rate from actual money market transactions. Interest rate\par
benchmarks that rely on transaction data do exist: for example, the Sterling Overnight Index\par
Average (SONIA) is a weighted average of interest rates from actual overnight unsecured sterling\par
transactions, compiled by the Wholesale Markets Brokers\rquote  Association (WMBA).\par
3.5 Implementation of this option would require the establishment of a trade-reporting\par
mechanism. Participating banks would need to report all relevant transactions to a central\par
repository in a timely manner. Banks would no longer need to make individual submissions as\par
collection could be automated. This would obviate the need for much of the governance and\par
oversight framework that arises from the use of judgement in the current model.\par
3.6 However, the difficulties inherent in moving to an inter-bank lending rate based purely on\par
transactions must be recognised:\par
\bullet  The number of transactions under the current LIBOR definition of inter-bank\par
lending is particularly thin for certain maturities and currencies (see Chart 2.C).\par
\bullet  A key issue with using transaction data would be how to publish benchmarks for\par
currencies and tenors with few transactions against which to corroborate\par
submissions. One solution could be to use the previous day\rquote s rate. However, in\par
periods of sustained illiquidity, the benchmark would effectively become fixed, and\par
unreflective of the true state of wider market conditions (not just wholesale\par
funding), which could cause market disruption.\par
\bullet  A transaction data approach is not immune to manipulation. Particularly in a low\par
volume environment, only a small number of transactions at off-market rates would\par
be sufficient to move the final rate fixing. Manipulation of this type may be harder\par
to monitor as it could be attempted by both internal and external parties.\par
\bullet  There may also be issues arising from the timing of a fix based on trading data.\par
SONIA and other overnight rate submissions are collected throughout the trading\par
day and fixed at the close of the market (approximately 5pm). By contrast, LIBOR\par
fixes at 11am for all currencies and this timing is embedded into some contracts.\par
Use of transaction data means that either the timing of the fix would have to\par
change, with the associated transition risk, or rates would need to be compiled over\par
two calendar days (24hr period before 11am).\par
\bullet  Establishing a trade repository would be potentially complex and costly.\par
3.7 The use of expert judgement and inference in determining rate submissions makes those\par
submissions vulnerable to a particular form of manipulation and attempted manipulation.\par
Therefore, a submission-based approach could be augmented by the use of transaction data,\par
where available and relevant. Furthermore, transactions data could be used to corroborate\par
submissions by individual banks.\par
3.8 Contributor submissions could be required to have followed some specific determination\par
process, with a requirement to use transactions data where relevant and useable. Where\par
contributing banks use their judgement, that judgement must be capable of being scrutinised\par
and justified ex post to ensure the integrity of those submissions. To do so, an auditable process\par
must be followed. Matters such as a bank\rquote s trading position, profitability, concerns about \par
negative media comment are clearly inappropriate factors on which to base submissions, and\par
must not be taken into account.\par
Options to allow a process of corroboration of individual submissions\par
3.9 There could be a procedure for the organisation that collates, compiles and publishes the\par
rate to corroborate individual submissions.\par
3.10 As an example, some authorities have required banks to determine their submissions based\par
on certain specified factors, with own transactions being given the greatest weight, subject to\par
certain specified adjustments and consideration. Third party transactions and offers may also be\par
used, and adjustments can be made so that the most recent transactions and offers are given\par
the most weight when determining a submission. Adjustments may also be made to take\par
account of market events, maturity/term structure, credit standards and the nonrepresentativeness\par
of transactions. However, such an approach could also cause difficulties for\par
submitters where they cannot take a precise view of the market, due to illiquidity or lack of\par
interaction in the market.\par
3.11 The approach for creating a precise methodology for rate determination, when combined\par
with widening the definition of wholesale funding (discussed below), could increase the ability\par
for corroboration by banks and thereby reduce the reliance on inference and judgement. It\par
would increase the operational burden on banks, which could discourage participation,\par
although this would be offset to some extent by reducing the risk to contributors of litigation\par
and the associated costs.\par
Options to allow corroboration of submissions against transactions\par
3.12 A potential solution to this could be to widen the definition of funding to include all\par
wholesale deposits. The intent of LIBOR is to reflect banks\rquote  unsecured funding costs, so the\par
benchmark scope could be broadened to encompass bank borrowing from money market\par
funds, commercial paper, certificates of deposit, corporate deposits, and other funding sources.\par
3.13 However, even with a wider definition the number of eligible underlying transactions is\par
likely to be small and might facilitate other users to influence the rate (Chart 3.A). And any\par
definitional change would have to be managed to ensure that existing LIBOR-referenced\par
contracts were not invalidated.\par
3.14 Corroboration of submissions is much harder in the maturities and currencies where there\par
are few trades. To mitigate this, one option could be to reduce the number of maturities and\par
currencies submitted by LIBOR contributors, which would have the benefit of reducing the\par
operational burden on contributing banks. Therefore a broad range of trades could be\par
considered including FX forwards and swaps.\par
Options to narrow the coverage of LIBOR\par
3.15 In light of the relatively low volume of trade in some currencies and maturities one\par
additional option would be to narrow the scope of LIBOR by reducing the number of currencies\par
and maturities that are currently submitted. For example, a number of the longer-dated\par
maturities and less used currencies are trading relatively thinly and coverage could be pared\par
down.\par
Options to reduce vulnerability to manipulation\par
3.16 One of the weaknesses in the current regime that has been identified is the possibility that\par
LIBOR can be manipulated by individual banks changing their submissions. This behaviour is\par
difficult to police because of the difficulty in corroborating submissions.\par
3.17 Although it facilitates transparency and scrutiny, it is possible that the daily publication of\par
individual submissions could also help to facilitate manipulation, or lead to other incentives to\par
change submission based on non bank funding considerations. To avoid this, there may be a case for restricting the publication of daily individual submissions to an oversight body and\par
delaying or aggregating the daily publication of individual submissions.\par
3.18 The existing calculation for LIBOR is the simple mean of the individual submissions of\par
banks. However, there may be benefits to using the median as an alternative. As only the middle\par
one (or two) submissions would affect the final rate, only movements by an individual\par
contributor to the middle fixing pair, or crossing the submission (from below the middle pair to\par
above, or vice versa) could affect the rate fix.\par
3.19 Chart 3.B illustrates an example. In the Median (i) scenario, the rate is influenced by Bank\par
F\lquote s submission moving above the fix; in Median (ii) scenario, where the submission remains\par
below the fix, the final rate fixing is unchanged. Behaviour of this type could be monitored\par
actively and any suspicious movements into, out of or across the fix could trigger a scrutiny or\par
corroboration process\f0 .\par
3.20 There are alternative options for changing the calculation method. For example, the fix\par
could be calculated by discarding the highest and lowest 25% of submissions, and then taking a\par
random submission from the central 50%. Depending on how dispersed submissions tend to be,\par
this may result in slightly higher day-to-day volatility than the current mean approach.\par
Options to mitigate perceived credit-signalling risk of LIBOR submissions\par
3.21 The most obvious solution to the stigma effect of LIBOR submission would be to\par
aggregate, cease or delay the publication of individual submissions, although at the cost of\par
reduced transparency.\par
3.22 Another potential option would be to amend the question contributing banks are asked,\par
back to the LIBOR definition pre-1998. The question was:\par
\ldblquote At what rate do you think inter-bank term deposits will be offered by one prime bank\par
to another prime bank for a reasonable market size today at 11am?\rdblquote\par
3.23 A potential benefit of this change would be to remove the conflict of interest arising from\par
potential credit-signalling. However, such a change would introduce a further degree of\par
inference and judgement to the process, which could be inconsistent with objective of\par
improving corroboration. This change could also increase participation as it might potentially reduce the litigation risk to contributors. Further, in theory contributors would no longer be\par
restricted to banks and could be expanded to include other participants in the wholesale\par
funding market, although this would need careful consideration as it might interact with\par
changes to the regulatory regime and other unintended consequences.\par
Options to increase participation in LIBOR panels\par
3.24 LIBOR provides a significant benefit to a wide variety of market participants including\par
commercial banks, investment banks, borrowers and investors around the world. However, only\par
a small subset of these \f1\endash  specifically a few large banks \endash  contribute to the setting of LIBOR, while\par
others benefit from the availability of the benchmark to the wider market.\par
3.25 24 banks currently contribute to LIBOR panels and the panels vary greatly in size between 6\par
and 18 banks. Therefore, even the largest of these panels contains relatively few contributors. At\par
present, participation on a LIBOR panel is voluntary and contributing to LIBOR, particularly in the\par
current environment, is largely an unrewarding activity and comes with potential costs.\par
3.26 While there are a number of ways through which the eligible pool of contributors could be\par
widened, it is not clear that there is an obvious way to make contributing to LIBOR more\par
attractive to potential contributors. Therefore it may be that the only option for increasing\par
participation in LIBOR panels may be regulatory (see below, under discussion of regulation).\par
Strengthening governance and oversight\par
3.27 While the previous section discussed ways in which the mechanisms for obtaining the rate\par
could be improved in order to restore lost confidence, important questions have also been raised\par
with regard to the governance of the process for setting LIBOR rates. In particular, the\par
governance and oversight function currently undertaken by the BBA and the FX&MM Committee\par
appears to be:\par
\bullet  insufficiently independent;\par
\bullet  insufficiently robust; and\par
\bullet  lacking in transparency.\par
Options to make oversight and scrutiny more independent\par
3.28 The independence of the oversight function exercised by FX&MM could be significantly\par
increased by broadening the membership of the Committee, which is currently dominated by\par
contributing banks. FX&MM could include representatives from a wider range of interested\par
groups, for example, increasing weighting of representatives from exchanges and clearing\par
houses, non-contributing banks, and other users of financial products that reference LIBOR. A\par
representative from the regulator (the FSA, or in future, FCA) could also be included in the\par
Committee\lquote s membership, although this would have to be considered carefully.\par
3.29 In order to comply with generally accepted standards of corporate governance best\par
practice, the balance of membership of FX&MM would include a majority of such\par
\ldblquote independent\rdblquote  (i.e. non contributing bank) members. And they would have the same voting\par
rights as other members of the Committee, and be fully involved in the scrutiny and oversight\par
work of the subcommittees.\par
Options to increase the robustness of oversight\par
3.30 This section discusses various options for improving the robustness and rigour of the\par
oversight and scrutiny provided by internal governance mechanisms. \par
3.31 First, as noted above, the oversight could support the establishment of effective systems\par
and controls within firms by establishing a clear code of conduct relating to policies and\par
procedures concerning LIBOR submissions. Such a code of conduct could cover, for example:\par
\bullet  contributing banks\rquote  internal policies covering the submission process, governance,\par
systems, training, record keeping, compliance, audit and disciplinary procedures,\par
including complaints management and escalation process;\par
\bullet  organisational structures, for example: a requirement that the LIBOR submitting\par
function should be located within liquidity and liability management division of the\par
bank, rather than a primarily trading division; and the establishment of internal\par
communication barriers to mitigate conflicts of interest (so-called \ldblquote Chinese walls\rdblquote );\par
\bullet  people issues: such as the need to have clearly accountable named individuals, at\par
the appropriate level of seniority within the bank, responsible for LIBOR submissions\par
and other relevant functions; the need for appropriate training and development\par
programmes for all those involved; and the establishment of appropriate\par
performance management frameworks, including remuneration policies;\par
\bullet  systems: to ensure consistent and timely delivery of submissions;\par
\bullet  record-keeping requirements covering all relevant aspects of the submission process\par
for an appropriate time horizon;\par
\bullet  analysis and management information to support contributing banks\rquote  own\par
monitoring of submission as well as oversight carried out by the overseeing body;\par
\bullet  compliance and audit: stipulating, for example, periodic internal and external audit\par
of submissions and procedures; and\par
\bullet  disciplinary procedures: providing for clear internal sanctions, establishing a zerotolerance\par
policy for non-compliance, with a credible whistle-blowing policy.\par
3.32 A detailed code such as this would provide much clearer guidance to contributing banks as\par
to the procedures they ought to be following in making LIBOR submissions. And it would also\par
allow governance structures to take a much more systematic approach to its oversight of\par
contributing banks to enable problems to be identified early and dealt with effectively.\par
3.33 Of course, the effectiveness of such a code will depend on the willingness of contributing\par
banks to comply with it, and also on the credibility of oversight of the code provided by the\par
governing body. Establishing credible oversight will depend on sufficient resource and expertise\par
being devoted to this function, so that appropriate mechanisms can be put in place to regularly\par
evaluate contributing banks\lquote  performance against the code. These mechanisms might include a\par
degree of supervision, as well as more \ldblquote automated\rdblquote  processes such as introducing additional\par
checks to individual rate submissions that could trigger more detailed investigations \endash  for\par
example, submissions, or groups of submissions, that behave in a specific suspicious manner, or\par
rates for particular maturities that do not appear to fit with the fixing curve.\par
3.34 Finally, effective oversight requires strong and credible sanctions. The existing oversight\par
function has limited powers to sanction contributors for misconduct. It is not clear that the\par
available sanction of preventing a contributor from continuing to participate in the panel is\par
either a sufficient deterrent to misconduct, or an appropriate penalty for those that are found to\par
have engaged in misconduct. Stronger sanctions could be introduced, such as financial or\par
reputational penalties. Transparency, discussed in the next section, would also act to increase\par
the credible deterrence effect of more robust oversight.\par
Options to increase transparency\par
3.35 Details of the membership of the relevant oversight and governance functions could be\par
made public, along with any declarations of conflicts of interests and the processes for election\par
or nomination to the oversight and governance functions.\par
3.36 Further, the minutes of important meetings could be published along with details of the\par
interactions between overseers on the one hand and contributors and administrators on the\par
other, with an appropriate delay if necessary. Transparency could also be extended to cover any\par
sanctions imposed to increase their deterrent effect.\par
Institutional arrangements\par
3.37 Alongside consideration of the nature of the governance and oversight arrangements that\par
will be needed to establish greater credibility sits the question of which institution should be\par
given responsibility for them. Broadly speaking, there are two options:\par
\bullet  a representative body, along similar lines to the current arrangements; or\par
\bullet  a commercial body \endash  a model exemplified by FTSE (a subsidiary company of the\par
London Stock Exchange Group), which is responsible for the production and\par
publication of the FTSE 100 and other equity, fixed income and investment indices.\par
Regulatory oversight and criminal sanctions\par
3.38 As set out in Chapter 2 the current regulatory and legal framework under which action is\par
being taken in respect of attempts to manipulate LIBOR is complex and somewhat piecemeal. A\par
purpose-built regime for the regulation of LIBOR would provide greater clarity and an express\par
mandate for the regulatory authorities to get directly involved.\par
3.39 This section considers two possible options for reforms to the regulatory and sanction\par
regime to address this issue:\par
\bullet  first, bringing LIBOR-related activities into the FSMA regulatory perimeter; and\par
\bullet  second, as highlighted in the Review\rquote s terms of reference, strengthening the\par
criminal sanction regime in respect of LIBOR-related offences.\par
Options for regulating benchmarks\par
Bringing LIBOR-related activities under FSMA regulation\par
3.40 Making LIBOR-related activities regulated activities under FSMA would give the FSA a clear\par
mandate to make rules which relate specifically to those activities, supervise the conduct of\par
those individuals involved in the LIBOR setting process and take regulatory action against firms\par
and individuals in relation to its misconduct.\par
3.41 As explained in Annex B, since activities of this kind are not currently included in the\par
indicative list of activities which may be brought within regulation under FSMA as set out in\par
Schedule 2 to FSMA, an amendment to FSMA would be needed before an amendment to the\par
Regulated Activities Order could be made.\par
3.42 However, there are a number of issues that would need to be considered. First and\par
foremost, is the question of which activities relating to LIBOR ought to be regulated. The\par
potential for manipulation and attempted manipulation by contributing banks suggests that\par
contributing to the setting of LIBOR ought, at least, to be captured if a regulatory regime is to\par
be implemented. As firms which provide submissions to LIBOR are already regulated by the FSA,\par
this should not involve bringing additional firms within regulation. However, as noted in the previous section on governance, it is also clear that there is a case to be considered for also\par
bringing the activity of administering the benchmark within regulation.\par
3.43 Second, there is the question of whether and how the approved persons regime ought to\par
be brought to bear on LIBOR-related activities.\par
3.44 There would be three potential approaches to achieve this. First, it might be sufficient for a\par
member of senior management (for example the Board-level executive of a contributing bank\par
with responsibility for LIBOR submissions) to be subject to additional requirements which relate\par
specifically to their LIBOR role under the approved persons regime. This could be done within\par
the existing framework and would not require additional primary legislation since senior\par
management within regulated firms are already approved persons. The FSA would need to\par
review the Statement of Principles which applies to senior management to ensure it adequately\par
covered behaviour expected from these senior executives in relation to LIBOR.\par
3.45 A second option would be to bring those managers who are responsible for LIBOR related\par
activities within the scope of the approved persons regime. If participation in the LIBOR setting\par
process is made a regulated activity, it might be appropriate to make having significant influence\par
over how the firm carries on such activities a \ldblquote controlled function\rdblquote  for the purposes of the\par
approved persons regime. This would ensure that individuals who are responsible for the firm\rquote s\par
role in LIBOR setting, but who are not necessarily part of the senior management team, are\par
subject to prior approval and enforcement action by the regulator.\par
3.46 A third option would be to bring those individuals responsible the firm\rquote s submissions to the\par
LIBOR process within the approved persons regime. This would be a more significant departure\par
from the current regime. The approved persons regime is currently limited to either those who\par
have significant influence on the conduct of a firm\rquote s affairs or who has a role in dealing with\par
customers or the property of customers. In other words, the approved persons regime is\par
currently limited to those who have a management role or those who deal with customers or\par
their property. Additional primary legislation would be needed to apply the approved persons\par
regime to those who do not have a management responsibility for the firm\rquote s role in relation to\par
LIBOR setting but who are responsible for making the firm\rquote s submission to the process.\par
3.47 If LIBOR administration was also specified as a regulated activity, there would also be a\par
case for bringing those individuals who exercise key roles in relation to that process (such as the\par
LIBOR Manager or members of FX&MM) within the scope of the approved persons regime.\par
3.48 Third, there is the question of whether contributing to LIBOR ought to be made subject to\par
a form of regulatory compulsion. One of the issues with the current framework identified in\par
Chapter 2 is that participation is currently voluntary. This creates a potential problem whereby\par
some banks are able to benefit from having a publicly available benchmark without having\par
contributed to its creation. The voluntary nature of the current regime may also impact adversely\par
on the importance which firms and individuals within those firms attach to LIBOR submissions\par
being accurate and reliable.\par
3.49 While there are a number of ways through which the eligible pool of contributors could be\par
widened, it is not clear that there is an obvious way to make contributing to LIBOR more\par
attractive to potential contributors. Therefore if increased participation in the LIBOR panels is a\par
desirable outcome, consideration may need to be given to a specific power enabling the\par
regulator to compel firms to participate. It is not clear whether this is an appropriate function\par
for the regulator to perform. Consideration would also need to be given as to whether\par
compelling firms to contribute to LIBOR (and incurring considerable expense as a result) would\par
be proportionate; which firms should be compelled to participate, and what the most\par
appropriate way of achieving this would be. The standalone market abuse regime\par
3.50 An alternative to full FSMA regulation, which would still have the effect of increasing the\par
purchase of regulatory authorities on LIBOR-related activities, is provided by the civil market\par
abuse regime. This regime \endash  which, unlike full FSMA regulation, is generally applicable and so\par
does not apply only to specific firms (authorised persons) or individuals (approved persons) \endash\par
implements the European Market Abuse Directive 2003. As detailed in Annex B, this regime\par
does not currently cover all abuses arising from LIBOR-related misconduct.\par
3.51 As discussed in the previous chapter, there is currently a negotiation underway to reform\par
the civil market abuse regime through a new European regulation. As this is a regulation (rather\par
than a directive), this new European legislation will be directly applicable, with very limited\par
national discretion over how it is to be implemented. On 25 July 2012, the Commission adopted\par
further specific amendments to the proposed MAR and CSMAD, in order to try and capture the\par
manipulation of interbank offer rates and other benchmarks more clearly.\par
3.52 There is clearly merit in considering whether the regulatory framework ought to be\par
strengthened in response to recent LIBOR-related events. The Review will consider these latest\par
proposals, and the sufficiency of current sanctioning powers, in more detail in its final report.\par
Options for strengthening the criminal sanctions regime\par
3.53 A key element of the Review\rquote s terms of reference is to consider the question of whether\par
new criminal sanctions are needed to deal with LIBOR-related offences. There are two elements\par
to this question \endash  first, whether there is a technical gap in terms of the existing legal provisions;\par
and second, whether there is a clear policy case for closing such a gap with new offences.\par
3.54 As described in Annex B, there is a legal gap in the FSA\rquote s powers which means it cannot\par
currently bring a criminal prosecution under FSMA for LIBOR-related offences. The most\par
obviously relevant offence under FSMA is that of misleading statements and practices under\par
Section 397. Section 397 is directed essentially at misleading statements or conduct which are\par
undertaken for the purpose of inducing another person to act (or not act) a particular way in\par
relation to certain agreements or investments, for example inducing them to enter into an\par
agreement, including statements which are reckless as to whether that will be the result. These\par
requirements set a high bar which means that attempts to manipulate LIBOR or other\par
benchmarks are unlikely to be caught by the provision.\par
3.55 One option for bringing LIBOR under the criminal sanctions regime under FSMA, therefore,\par
would be to broaden the scope of Section 397. This could be achieved \endash  for example \endash  by\par
removing the requirement that the misleading statement or action must have been made for the\par
purpose of inducing another person to act. It should be recognised that this would be a\par
potentially significant change that went beyond LIBOR. Careful consideration would have to be\par
given to whether such a change would be necessary or proportionate.\par
3.56 The Review recognises that the Government\rquote s wider policy is that there should not be a\par
proliferation of unnecessary criminal offences, which applies also to amendments to existing\par
offences to broaden their application.1\par
\bullet  whether available alternatives, such as regulatory mechanisms, would provide\par
effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions;\par
\bullet  any particular drivers behind the proposed new offences (including, for example,\par
strong public interest in change);\par
\bullet  whether the behaviour is sufficiently serious to merit the stigma associated with a\par
criminal conviction (which attempted benchmark manipulation arguably is);\par
\bullet  whether the behaviour is already caught by the existing criminal law;\par
\bullet  the formulation of the individual offences proposed, in particular whether they\par
focus on the behaviour being targeted without criminalising behaviour more\par
widely;\par
\bullet  where it is proposed to create a hierarchy of enforcement mechanisms, such as a\par
regulatory system supplemented by criminal offences, whether the offences will be\par
a sanction of last resort and how that is achieved (for example, by restricting\par
criminal offences to the most serious or persistent breaches, with guidance to this\par
effect for prosecutors).\par
3.57 The Review will consider the case for broadening section 397 \endash  or for creating other LIBOR\par
related offences (for example, colluding with other submitters to attempt to manipulate the\par
benchmark) which the FSA could prosecute \endash  on the basis of the factors listed above, together\par
with other relevant factors.\par
3.58 Steps are also being taken in Europe to consider the implementation of a new criminal\par
sanctions regime through CSMAD, which includes amendments to bring benchmark\par
manipulation within scope. This would provide another route for bringing LIBOR manipulation\par
under a criminal regime.\par
3.59 Some Member States \endash  the UK, Ireland and Denmark \endash  are not automatically opted in to\par
the Directive. The UK Government has signalled its intention not to opt in at this stage, until the\par
implications of the Directive can be assessed properly, once parallel negotiations on the civil\par
regime and MiFID2 have concluded. The Review will nevertheless consider the draft proposals\par
brought forward by the European Commission.\par
Box 3.A: Consultation questions\par
Can LIBOR be strengthened is such a way that it can remain a credible benchmark?\par
Could a hybrid methodology for calculating LIBOR work effectively?\par
Could the number of maturities and currencies currently covered by the LIBOR benchmark be\par
reduced?\par
Is an alternative governance body for LIBOR required in the short term?\par
Should the setting of and/or the submission to LIBOR be regulated activities?\par
Should the regulator be provided with specific powers of criminal investigation and\par
prosecution in relation to attempted manipulation and manipulation of LIBOR?\par
What role should authorities play in reforming the mechanism and governance of LIBOR?\par
Which types of financial contract, if any, would be particularly affected by the risks of a\par
transition from LIBOR?\par
Introduction\par
4.1 Whatever improvements are made to LIBOR, it is likely that markets will want to consider\par
alternative benchmarks for at least some of the types of transaction that currently rely on LIBOR.\par
In some cases, there are existing rates that could be used more widely. For other types of\par
transactions, new benchmarks may need to be developed.\par
4.2 Any migration to new benchmarks would require a carefully planned and managed\par
transition, in order to limit disruption to the huge volume of outstanding contracts that\par
reference LIBOR.\par
4.3 Given the global importance of LIBOR, a decision to migrate towards alternative benchmarks\par
should be coordinated at an international level by relevant bodies. The UK authorities should\par
take a leading role in these reforms.\par
4.4 This Chapter therefore examines whether an alternative benchmark could provide a global\par
benchmark that is sufficiently robust and credible. Any discussion of alternative benchmarks will\par
need to consider three issues:\par
\bullet  The appropriate financial instrument, which is used to determine an interest rate;\par
\bullet  The mechanism or methodology by which the final benchmark is compiled; and\par
\bullet  The likely costs and impacts of migrating to an alternative rate, given the scale and\par
scope of existing financial contracts that reference LIBOR.\par
Constructing alternative benchmarks\par
The uses of LIBOR\par
4.5 As discussed in Chapter 2, LIBOR was created as a standardised and uniform benchmark for\par
use in the syndicated loans market. Since then use of LIBOR has expanded to derivatives and\par
other financial contracts. As well as a standardised cost of bank funding, which allows banks to\par
pass on their cost of funds to borrowers, interest rate derivatives, which reference LIBOR, are\par
also used to hedge fluctuations in interest rates.\par
4.6 LIBOR has grown to be the most accepted benchmark across capital markets. Despite this,\par
while some of the uses of LIBOR are specifically related to bank funding, not all are. It may be\par
that for some market participants and contracts, LIBOR may not be the most appropriate\par
interest rate reference. As a result, any alternative benchmark does not necessarily need to have\par
identical features to LIBOR, but any rate must be fit for the purpose for which it is intended.\par
Determining an appropriate alternative interest rate instrument\par
Types of interest rate references\par
4.7 There are different types of potential interest rate references. As well as interest rates, some\par
of these references (including LIBOR) reflect different degrees of credit and liquidity risk.\par
\bullet  Counterparty credit risk: LIBOR currently includes an element of counterparty credit\par
risk of the average bank contributing to the LIBOR panel, as this is a component of\par
their funding cost. This aspect is desirable for a benchmark for loans, as lenders can\par
pass on their borrowing costs. It may be that some users do not require a credit risk\par
component for the benchmark.\par
\bullet  Liquidity risk of using cash for an extended period: for example, LIBOR currently\par
reflects the premium that lenders require to give up access to their funds for a\par
specific period of time. Again, some usage of a benchmark may not require this\par
feature.\par
4.8 Different levels of counterparty credit and/or liquidity risk can be appropriate for different\par
applications in which interest rate references are used\par
Criteria for determining an appropriate alternative interest rate instrument\par
4.9 There are a number of criteria that can be used to determine the suitability of a particular\par
interest rate instrument.\par
\bullet  The benchmark should have a maturity curve, to allow flexible use of the rate in\par
different contracts and to allow the hedging of different interest rate exposures; i.e.\par
the rate should contain a curve of future expected interest rates.\par
\bullet  For a benchmark rate to be representative and dynamic, there should be sufficient\par
transaction volumes with which to establish a rate\par
\bullet  The rates provided should be resilient throughout periods of illiquidity. The rate\par
should be able to be published even during periods of financial stress when many\par
markets cease to function properly.\par
\bullet  Be simple and standardised with respect to the instruments and transactions that\par
are used to determine the rate; particularly, across multiple currency jurisdictions.\par
This in turn can facilitate a deep and liquid market, from which data inputs can be\par
captured.\par
\bullet  Have a long data series, in order to have a robust data input into pricing and risk\par
models.\par
Profile of potential interest rate instruments\par
4.10 There are different instruments that may be applicable for use as a reference for interest\par
rates, which can then be used for financial contracts.\par
4.11 Central bank policy rate. This is the rate paid to banks by the central bank on target\par
reserves held at the central bank and is the key lever for monetary policy. As such, movements in\par
the policy rate have a significant impact in wider interest rates.\par
\bullet  There may be conflicting objectives for national central banks in directly\par
determining private interest rates for a global benchmark. In practice, banks do not\par
trade with each other at precisely the central bank policy rate.\par
4.12 Overnight unsecured lending: The representation of the central bank policy rate is the\par
average overnight cash lending rate. In the UK, this is measured by the SONIA (Euro area\par
equivalent is EONIA), which is comprised of the weighted average of all overnight sterling\par
money trades, reported to WMBA.\par
\bullet  Overnight cash lending has increased since the decline in term unsecured lending\par
began in 2007-08 meaning the rate is composed by a robust volume of\par
transactions and is representative of interbank lending. \par
\bullet  However, as the lending is overnight, there is no maturity curve and very little credit\par
or liquidity risk priced into the rate. Additionally, basing the rate on transactions\par
would cause difficulties for simultaneous settlement in different currencies.\par
4.13 Certificates of deposit (CDs) or commercial paper (CP): Banks issue CDs and CP in order to\par
raise cash funding. Both tend to pay a fixed rate of interest and have specific, short-term maturity\par
dates. CDs are promissory notes on time deposits, whereas CP is a debt certificate. Prices of these\par
instruments from trading in the secondary market can be used to generate a yield.\par
\bullet  CDs and CP are issued by commercial banks and hence reflect the credit risk of the\par
issuer. CDs are also issued by some central banks (known as \ldblquote bank bills\rdblquote ), which\par
removes credit risk.\par
\bullet  There are low volumes in both the primary and secondary markets for CDs and CP;\par
these markets have been adversely affected by concerns for counterparty credit risk\par
since 2007-08. The low volumes also affect the ability for the rates to be\par
representative of bank funding.\par
4.14 Overnight index swaps (OIS) are interest rate swaps between a fixed rate and the overnight\par
cash lending rate (e.g. SONIA or EONIA), for a specific maturity. Transactions in the swap market\par
can then be used to generate a maturity curve for overnight interest rates.\par
\bullet  The OIS curve should be a representation of the expected future path of the central\par
bank policy rate.\par
\bullet  As the instrument is a swap, no principal is paid between counterparties and hence\par
the rate does includes limited liquidity and counterparty risk premia. OIS as a\par
benchmark would be heavily dependent on the robustness of the overnight cash rate.\par
4.15 Treasury Bills (T-Bills): Another alternative is to use the yield of high quality short-term\par
government debt securities.\par
\bullet  A key advantage of this is that a well-established and liquid market for these\par
securities already exists, and a yield curve exists for different maturities.\par
\bullet  Yields on sovereign bills include the liquidity and credit risk of the respective issuer.\par
4.16 Repurchase agreements (\ldblquote repo rates\rdblquote ): Indices based on the rates paid for repo\par
transactions could also be used. The recent increase in the use of repos for banks, as a response\par
to counterparty risk concerns, may increase the relevance of a repo rate-based benchmark.\par
Reflecting this, measures of repo rates have recently been launched in the UK or US.1\par
\bullet  Some specified and standardised set of collateral and haircuts would be required to\par
be used for compiling a benchmark based on repo rates.\par
\bullet  Repo rates may reflect not only counterparty credit risk, but the credit and liquidity\par
risks of the underlying collateral.\par
\bullet  Repo activity is mostly concentrated on short tenors.\par
Analysis of potential interest rate instruments\par
4.17 Each interest rate instrument has advantages and disadvantages. Importantly, many of the\par
measures do not have credit and liquidity risks priced in; those that do include credit and liquidity premia either have a limited or no maturity profile. In addition, it should be noted that\par
some of these rates are based on, or incorporate, expert judgement and surveys.\par
Ultimately, the decision over which type of benchmark should be used for a particular\par
transaction will be taken depending on the intended use of the benchmark. For example, not all\par
products will require a benchmark that takes into account movements in credit and liquidity\par
risks\f0  4.18 In order to create a specific, final benchmark from individual interest rate instruments,\par
some mechanism or methodology to organise the data inputs will be required. Again, there are\par
a number of issues that can be used to measure the utility of each methodology:\par
\f1\bullet  Simultaneous publication: if any alternative benchmark is intended to be used\par
globally, rates for different currencies and maturities must be published\par
simultaneously. Basis and cross-currency swaps \endash  for example, a swap of 3m USD\par
LIBOR to 3m GBP LIBOR \endash  would require simultaneous publication of both rates in\par
order to avoid any distortion from market movements that occur between different\par
publication times.\par
\bullet  Deep and liquid market: In order for a robust and representative rate to be\par
compiled, a significant volume of transactions, ideally for tenors up to twelve\par
months, may be required. This allows contributors to take a robust assessment of\par
the marker and is especially important where the rate is based solely on transaction\par
data.\par
\bullet  Resilience in a stressed market: In stressed scenarios, market participants may be\par
less willing to trade with one another. In turn, the number of transactions falls\par
which could affect the availability of the rate. As an alternative benchmark would\par
be referenced in a significant number of contracts, it is vital that the rate is available\par
during stressed periods. \bullet  Effect on contributor balance sheet: The mechanism should not impose a large\par
burden on contributor balance sheet size. In particular, participants should not be\par
forced to take on credit and liquidity risks that they do not require.\par
\bullet  The sample size: the benchmark compilation process can either use all or a subsample\par
of the participants or transactions for a particular instrument. For example,\par
LIBOR uses a sub-set of banks arranged into currency panels. In order to increase\par
the overall representativeness of the rate, the number of participants/transactions\par
should be high.\par
\bullet  Incentives to participate: the mechanism should not discourage the participation of\par
particular contributors. Any disincentive to participate could compromise the\par
availability of the benchmark, particularly in stressed conditions.\par
\bullet  Operational costs to contributors: similarly, the direct and indirect costs of\par
participating in the benchmark mechanism should not be prohibitively high.\par
\bullet  Transparency of methodology: to ensure accountability and external evaluation of\par
the robustness of the benchmark.\f0  Profile of potential mechanisms for compiling a benchmark\par
4.19 There are three main mechanisms which can be used to calculate the benchmark.\par
4.20 Uncommitted submissions: A number of contributors provide submissions on the specific\par
interest rate, which are then compiled \f1\endash  using some formula \endash  into a final published rate. The\par
submissions provided are not executable by other participants and hence are uncommitted. This\par
is the mechanism currently used for LIBOR.\par
\bullet  This system is flexible in terms of publication timing. This methodology does not\par
place any pressures on contributor balance sheets and is low cost. Contributors are\par
required to make an assessment of the market conditions, which means that a rate\par
can also be produced in any market scenario.\par
\bullet  However, if market conditions deteriorate, an uncommitted submission mechanism\par
would become more reliant on the contributor\rquote s expert judgement, which may be\par
susceptible to conflicts of interest. Therefore, a strong and robust governance\par
framework is required to manage those conflicts.\par
4.21 Average transaction prices: In this mechanism, all, or a subset, of participants in a\par
particular market are required to report transactions of the specified instrument to a central\par
repository. At a set time each day, the price of those transactions can then be analysed using\par
some calculation methodology (e.g. weighted average) to create a final interest rate fixing for\par
that particular instrument.\par
\bullet  The compilation of the rate may not require increased contributor balance sheets\par
and capital requirements unless contributors are required to enter into transactions\par
to ensure a rate is published. Moreover, the rate would likely be an accurate\par
representation of the underlying market.\par
\bullet  The robustness and availability of the rate may be affected by the volume and\par
significance of transactions in the underlying market, both in normal times and\par
particularly in a stressed scenario. Where transaction volumes are low, a rate based\par
purely on transaction prices could still be subject to conflicts of interest or\par
manipulation. Additionally, to take into account the maximum number of\par
transactions, the rate should be published towards the end of each business day. If\par
a similar rate was required for different currencies, this would prove difficult. \f0  4.22 Committed quote-based trading platform: Another way to reveal the price at which banks\par
are able to obtain funding from a marginal source is through a committed two-way quote (bid\par
and offer) process. Banks would submit quotes to a trading auction platform either for\par
unsecured cash or commercial paper, which are executable if matched by another participant.\par
\f1\bullet  A platform where quotes can be executed would have the attraction that it forces\par
banks to only submit quotes that they are willing to honour. This would reduce the\par
incentives to manipulate the rate, as banks would be less likely to bid and offer rates\par
at which they are unwilling to trade if they might be forced to trade at those rates.\par
\bullet  However, the corollary of this is that during periods of stress, contributors would\par
likely submit wide bid-offer spreads to avoid the risk of their quotes being executed.\par
This rate mechanism, especially when the rate is required to be published daily,\par
could also expand contributor balance sheet, attracting further capital\par
requirements. Operational costs to participants would also likely be high. These two\par
issues would be clear disincentives to participate.\par
4.23 None of these mechanisms are immune from attempts to manipulate the benchmark,\par
especially while conflicts of interest exist. Therefore, in order to mitigate these problems each\par
mechanism would require credible governance and oversight procedures, and indeed, they may\par
require official regulation.\f0  Transition to an alternative benchmark\par
4.24 Estimates suggest that there are at least $300tn of existing transactions that reference\par
LIBOR. The scale and scope of existing contracts, and the non-standardised documentation for\par
those contracts, means that any transition to an alternative rate would be difficult to achieve.\par
Impact of replacing LIBOR with an alternative rate\par
4.25 A non-transitory change in the LIBOR time series (a step-up or \f1\endash down), or a structural\par
increase in volatility, would have a significant effect on the value of contracts. Due to the volume\par
of outstanding contracts, even small changes in the LIBOR rate can have significant distributional\par
consequences between counterparties. If the value of the successor rate is different from the\par
existing rate, any move from LIBOR to any alternative benchmark would oblige all participants to\par
take on a basis risk between LIBOR and an alternative benchmark on future contingent cash flows.\par
4.26 Furthermore, as the LIBOR definition and mechanism have not had any significant changes\par
since 1998, there is at least 12 years of consistent historical data. The long data series allows\par
participants to analyse long term historical volatility and correlation to other asset classes, which\par
are important inputs when pricing credit risks, optionality and correlation. An alternative rate\par
would need to be long-established before it could be relied upon to accurately price\par
instruments.\par
4.27 There would also be other significant issues arising from any migration to an alternative\par
rate. Primarily, existing contracts would need to be re-negotiated. The counterparties to each\par
contract must first agree the rate that succeeds LIBOR. Any party whose contract value would be\par
lessened by a migration to a successor rate is unlikely to agree to migration. If the migration\par
were to be enforced, this would lead to litigation risk.\par
4.28 Secondly, contracts may need to be re-drafted in order to migrate to an alternative rate.\par
Many existing contracts are not standardised and the precise manner in which contracts\par
reference LIBOR is non-uniform. For example, some contracts refer broadly to the cost of interbank\par
funds in the London market, some to \ldblquote LIBOR\rdblquote  or \ldblquote BBALIBOR\rdblquote , and others refer to the\par
Thomson Reuters screen which displays the relevant rate. By contrast, standardised contracts,\par
such as those which use the ISDA2\par
Role of legacy positions and migration to an alternative benchmark\par
Master Agreement documentation and those traded onexchange,\par
could be migrated less problematically. Any transition process would have to be\par
sufficiently robust to ensure that all definitions and references had been captured, minimising\par
any risk of uncertainty or litigation risks.\par
4.29 It is difficult to determine a precise division between those exposures that reference LIBOR\par
and those that reference an alternative rate. This is because existing exposures are a key driver of\par
future transactions.\par
4.30 Future cash flows are generated from legacy contracts and are subject to a number of\par
contingencies. Examples of such contingencies include: movements of delta, interest rate\par
options, call-ability/put-ability of notes, early termination options, counterparty defaults and\par
credit downgrades, amongst others. Therefore, existing contracts have contingent exposures to\par
LIBOR \endash  which are unknown in the present \endash  and may require a new contract to hedge those\par
LIBOR exposures. As such, the volume of legacy contracts which reference LIBOR is a\par
determinant of future transactions. \f0 4.31 It would be difficult to mandate an immediate migration from one benchmark to an\par
alternative. Such a transition would need to be carefully managed and acceptable to all\par
counterparties to avoid disruption. There are four possibilities for a migration to an alternative rate:\par
4.32 Allow LIBOR and alternatives to co-exist: LIBOR is not discontinued and market participants\par
are free to choose which rate they prefer. In this scenario, it is likely that inertia and the role of\par
legacy contracts would not provide sufficient incentive for participants to choose an alternative.\par
In this case, participants may require some direction to migrate away from LIBOR by the\par
authorities. As with LIBOR, there may be network effects from an alternative rate, so exposures\par
and liquidity in that rate will grow as the rate becomes more established. It is unlikely that this\par
growth would be available in the short- to medium-term.\par
4.33 Peg LIBOR to an alternative benchmark after co-existence: After a specific time period of\par
co-existence for LIBOR and an alternative, LIBOR becomes pegged at a fixed spread to an\par
alternative benchmark (e.g. LIBOR = alternative benchmark + X). This approach allows LIBOR to\par
continue to exist, but carries the possibility of transition risk.\par
4.34 Discontinue LIBOR after co-existence: In this migration approach, the two rates run in parallel\par
until some pre-determined date, after which LIBOR is discontinued. Discontinuation of LIBOR\par
would require re-negotiation and re-drafting of millions of contracts, which in turn would lead to\par
litigation and disputes between counterparties. This approach would likely be severely disruptive.\par
4.35 Switch to an alternative rate on a specific deadline: This migration can be compared to the\par
transition to the Euro from individual currencies. In order for this transition to be smooth it\par
would be necessary for an alternative rate to be acceptable to all parties, including international\par
authorities. As an alternative rate would not be available prior to deadline day, there would be\par
significant re-distributional effects if an alternative is divergent from LIBOR, which could have\par
macro-prudential consequences. This approach also presents similar disruption and litigation\par
risks as discussed above.\par
4.36 All of the approaches to migration away from LIBOR above present risks to market\par
participants. LIBOR as a benchmark is used globally and any enforced transition would require\par
meticulous planning and international coordination. Consequently, it is likely that management\par
of any transition would require universal agreement and a significant role for the global\par
regulatory authorities.\par
The role of a global benchmark\par
4.37 Ultimately, the choice of benchmarks for financial contracts is largely market-driven. If\par
market participants decide that alternatives to established benchmarks such as LIBOR are more\par
appropriate, they will move towards using these alternatives. This said, migration to an\par
alternative benchmark might be hindered by market inertia regarding the adoption of a new\par
global benchmark.\par
4.38 However, decisions taken by regulatory authorities will influence the choices made by the\par
market. If regulators and authorities determine to reform LIBOR in such a way that issues\par
identified above are dealt with, markets might well take this action as an implicit approval to\par
continue using the existing benchmark.\par
4.39 Given the importance of regulators and authorities in guiding market behaviour on\par
benchmark usage, as well as the need for a carefully managed transition, it might be appropriate\par
for an international authority to take a proactive role in coordinating the approach to the use of\par
benchmarks in financial markets. Such a role could be undertaken by the International\par
Organisation for Securities Commissions (IOSCO) or the Financial Stability Board (FSB).\par
\f1\par
\f0\lang9\par
}
 